Today is the 6th of November 2019 this is Dr. Adiola D'Huez. Can you say your full name for the recording?
My name is Gwendolyn Hester, Gwendolyn Jemima Hester.
Jemima? Yeah. And where were you born?
I was actually born in St. Kitts, St. Kitts the Caribbean.
What is your birthdate?
Oh, I was born in May.
In May. What year?
I'm over 21.
Okay, okay. And what were your parents' names?
My father's Alexander Brody.
And my mother's name was Leonora.
Her maiden name you want, isn't it?
You could say Brody.
Oh, Leonora Brody.
And what did your mom do?
Oh, my mom worked as a nurse.
In St. Kitts?
No, here in Britain.
Okay, and what did your father do?
He worked for Super Oil Seal, here in Britain, until he retired.
Okay, wow.
Okay, so...
That was his only job, his first and ever job.
Wow, that's a long time. So he came straight to Cardiff when he came over?
Yes, when they came over, they got a job straight away.
Like a friend of mine, when she first came into Newport, she saw all these chimneys.
She thought, oh, they're no sort of jobs.
She thought all the chimneys are streets full of oil factories.
She didn't realize the factories looked like a fireplace.
To keep them warm, she thought they were all factories.
What do you remember about St. Kitts?
All I remember about St. Kitts is grapes.
With these grapes, the black grapes, the way...
I've got a sister in St. Kitts now, and I asked her about them.
And she said, they're called sea grapes.
They're only grown by the sea. Do you know what I mean?
I don't have to taste one.
That's the only thing I remember, is the sea grapes.
Okay, so you were very young when you came over here.
How old were you when you came over?
Oh, well, I started, like I said, in junior school.
So how old were you? About five?
How old were you when you came over to the UK from St. Kitts?
Do you remember? No.
Okay. Do you remember the journey coming over?
Not at all.
Do you know if you came by plane or... Boat.
You came by boat? Yeah.
Did you travel with your mother?
No, no, no. I traveled with...
Someone came over, a lady, somebody brought me over.
You know, didn't come over with the parents, no.
And your parents were already here?
Yes, my parents were already here.
And my grandmother looked after me.
My father's mother looked after me.
She was a business lady.
She sold fish, and she also had property that she rented out.
She was a business lady. She rented them out.
Because she was taking me everywhere with her, selling the fish,
and she collects no rent, and she's the church lady.
She takes me to church in the evenings,
Sundays, during the week, as well.
She takes me everywhere with her.
So you remember your grandmother?
Yeah, I remember my grandmother, yeah.
She was a big influence.
And of course, she used to say to me,
if you got a pound, you make sure you save 50 pence,
or save half, or whatever you got.
You know, that's put me in good stead, you know, here.
Because my husband was from Newport here, you know.
And I can remember once his friend came, wanted him to go out.
And he said... he told him no, he wouldn't.
I said, why don't you go out with him, because you know.
He said, I got no money, so I gave him five pounds.
He said, where did you get that five pounds from?
I said, I saved... I said, when I have my money,
I said, even if I got a pound, I make sure I save 50 pence,
and I save 50 pence every week, so I'll have the five pounds.
And he was so... he was so impressed.
He worked for medical and surgical exhibition.
So he sent me to work all week.
He used to give me his wage packet.
And he said, I'll have to get another job,
so we can go out once or twice a week, so I'll take you out.
And so he taught himself, he bought the book, to do electrician.
And he got a job as electrician.
He did a warehouse.
And they paid him for it, yeah.
You know, he's very quick at it.
Where was he from? Was he from St. Kitts as well?
No, he was from here.
He was British, and he was from here, you know.
My mother-in-law, she was Cockney.
You know, Blomley, Blomley, they were Cockney.
And his sisters, they were Fair, you know.
All of them.
Okay.
So you don't remember much about St. Kitts,
but you remember your grandmother very much.
Yeah.
And she taught you some really key lessons about...
Yeah, that's what I've learned, yeah.
Because through that, I'm a widow now.
My husband got killed.
I invited to a wedding for St. Kitts.
And my husband, he's one in all.
He said, Caribbean people are not one for time.
And he hates to be on time.
He said, so what I'll do, we're going to London.
He said, I'll go to college, bring your parents up,
and they can stay here.
And so we all traveled up early then,
ran away to London.
So I said, okay.
So I was on his way to Cardiff, and articulated Laurie,
hit the driver's side and killed him outright.
You know, so I've been a widow.
I've been with two children, you know, a boy and a girl.
So I've been widows ever since 40 odd years.
I've been in Newport now 50 odd years.
A long time, isn't it?
Very, very long time, yeah.
I'm so sorry to hear that.
That must have been so dramatic for you.
When I met him, it was my very first time out.
Because I've never been in a club before.
And my friend, they felt sorry for me
because I've never been to the park.
They didn't let us go to the park.
Never been to the park.
Never been to the picture house before ever.
You'd think I'd just come from abroad.
Parents didn't let us.
They were very strict.
So my friend kept with his story.
He said, make sure you're ready when I come for you.
I said, okay.
Because she knew when we're in the house,
we are closed, which is for the house.
When we're going out, we change for your best clothes.
It was like that in those days.
So when she came, I'd already had a bath
and put my best clothes underneath
and my old clothes on the top of it.
So when she came in, she said, Mr. Brody.
And she was begging him.
And he said to her,
and he said to her, Gwen's a Christian.
And I heard him.
I said, oh, but I want to go still.
He said, Gwen, you can't have God in one hand
and the devil in the other.
I said, oh, but I want to go.
I can't.
So it's kind of short story.
It came to the point.
He said, yes, so I went.
And it's that night I met my husband.
Oh my gosh.
That's amazing.
And he said to me, I was telling about God.
And he went, oh, Flo, I don't know what you're on about.
And he invited me to the flicks.
I said, yes.
I didn't know what the flicks were.
That's the pictures.
And I asked my father, can I go?
I said, can I go?
He said, meet who?
I said a friend.
He said, what friend?
I said, a friend.
He said, what sort of a friend?
I couldn't say the word boyfriend.
You know, sort of a memory like that.
Boyfriend.
And he said, I'll tell you what.
Go and meet him.
Bring him here first.
And then you can go out with him.
So I met him and I brought him back to the house.
In Cardicatis.
And then my father asked him, you know, how old he was,
what his job was, what was his intention, all that.
He couldn't get over it.
He was laughing his head off.
He was telling his friends about it.
And they were in stitches over it.
He said, I thought I was going back in time, he said.
In there with them.
You know.
How old were you when you met him?
I met him at 16.
I got married at 17.
And he said to me, go and I'd be very lucky if I lived to be 28.
And I went to watch.
I thought, oh, is something wrong with him?
I don't want him no more now.
But there was nothing wrong with him.
He just felt it all along.
I can remember saying to him, Tony, you're 28 and you're still alive.
He said to me, Gwen, well, I hate to leave you with nothing.
I want you to take out the insurance.
I had to take out the insurance for him.
So I took it out.
And I felt so pleased.
I went to Cardicatis and sent my file.
Tony, you've told me to take out the insurance if anything happens to him.
You know, I love him so much.
My father tore me off.
He said, you're after a dead man's money.
And that played on my mind, you know.
And I told Tony what he said.
Tony said to me, take the notice of him.
There's that silly West Indian nonsense.
He just take the notice of it.
But I let the insurance, I let it lapse.
And when I let it lapse, I told him.
He said, we take it out again.
So I took it out again, you know.
But it played on my mind, you know, my father said.
You know, but when it happened, I didn't have no insurance.
But you work for medical and surgical exhibition.
And the chop farm his way came to see me at the time.
All in my house discussing, no, she got no insurance.
All the West Indian nutrition, but no one offered.
Thank you.
And you can get over it.
So he went back to his boss.
And he told him what was going on.
And the boss, they paid for the funeral,
cost everything for me, so God was good.
Either way, you know, I still provide you for, you know.
God was good.
So when you came over here as a little girl,
what was it like?
You had to start going to school, right?
Yeah.
Do you know if you, do you remember going to school
and getting kids?
Or were you too little to go to school?
I do not be racking my brains about it.
I can't remember any.
I can't remember the experience in school at all.
I can't remember that.
I can't remember that at all.
Do you remember the experience in school in Britain?
Oh, yes, of course.
All my experience here, yes.
Tell me a bit about it.
What was it like for you?
Well, here the children had pocket money.
They'd buy crisp and things like that.
But we never ever had pocket money, never.
And, you know, and they'd all have crisp.
And they'd give me, you know, one always offer you.
But I never had no money to go and buy sweets or anything like that.
And they all did, you know, every day same old.
I think they felt sorry for, you know, that's what they'd offer.
So your parents were very, very strict.
Did you, did your brothers and sisters come as well,
or was it just you?
How, how many siblings do you have?
There's nine.
I'm the eldest of nine.
The eldest of nine.
They were strict.
They, they didn't have pocket money at all either.
Did everybody come over at the same time or?
No, towards the time.
It was towards the time.
Were you one of the first ones to come over or were you later on?
And the later ones was Wingrove.
And then I was the second one.
I should have been the first, but I said no at the time, I think.
Why did you say no?
I think my grandmother wanted me as well.
She didn't want you to go.
No, she said they wanted me to come.
But I said stay, I wouldn't be the first.
Okay.
Did you like, so did you like school?
Did you enjoy school?
Yeah.
Well, I didn't like learning, but yes, I was in school.
Yes.
What did you want to be when you grew up?
Did you have any dreams?
Oh, I wanted to be, yes, I wanted to be a typist.
What's the type in Italian?
Yes, so when my husband died, I was in John Ford Square in Newport,
and this blonde lady came up to me and said, excuse me, I said yeah.
She said, are you working?
I said no.
She said, do you have a job?
She said, would you like one?
I said yes, please.
And she said, what qualifications have you got?
I said nothing.
She goes nothing.
I goes absolutely nothing.
I said I've got no qualifications whatsoever.
She goes nothing.
She goes try.
I said, well, I do have pitman's.
I done pitman's.
Remember, everywhere there's pitman's.
That's typing.
It was typing and shortened in those days.
That's called qualification.
She goes pitman's.
She goes, of course you got qualifications, you know.
And she goes because I'm looking, I mean, they're looking for people to work at the business,
the Texas office.
Have you heard of it?
You passed it coming up here.
I worked there for 25 years.
Yeah.
There I had, you know, a lot of racism there because it wasn't blatant.
They're all nice to me and they're friendly.
But when they were marking my report, it was always, I didn't realize it was different.
Rather than get me fitted, it was always likely to be fitted, likely.
And one of the supervisors, she had an accident and broke her leg and she couldn't attend.
So the one who was next in line, they asked him to go into the computer room to learn that.
No one wanted to do it because if you make a mistake, the whole thing would crash if you miss out a comma or anything like that.
So the first two refused, so I was next in line, I was the third in line.
So they asked if I wanted to do it, I said yes.
So when I went in there, I remember, you know, the speed was very fast.
My feet was 19,000.
We all very fast, you know.
So I thought to myself, I'll go fast, stop, and I'll check twice before I press it.
That's what I did.
And the overall boss, she saw me go and I stopped and checked.
She goes, Gwen, if they saw you there like that, you won't look very professional.
I'm going to be a bit quicker.
She just wanted me to, I know what she was up to, but I just totally ignored and I just carried on because they all wanted me to make a mistake.
I know they didn't.
But anyway, they did call me and they said to me I was doing very good, you know, in there, because I was in there for six months and no accident at all.
And they didn't like it.
You could see they didn't like it.
But when I had my report, they still put likely to be fitted.
What does likely to be fitted mean?
It means you're not good enough for promotion.
Likely means either you're good, likely, or you're no good.
You know, they always gave me the middle.
But anyway, I wanted to go in for, I wanted to graduate higher, the next level.
And to the next level, I put in for it.
When I put in for it, it happened when I was walking through the corridor, one of their bosses stopped me and said to me, when I hear you're going for the...
Where's my camera?
And then he said to me, I hear that you're going for the position.
I said yes, because I'm one of the bosses who will be interviewing you.
And he said, I'll give you a tip.
You know, first they look at your shoes.
If the heat is scuff, it goes against you.
And if it's worn down, you know.
So he gave me those tips.
It was good.
But anyway, and he said, when the question be on drugs.
And then going down to the meeting for my interview, I had the radio on.
And guess what?
They were talking about drugs.
Someone's been interviewed.
So I remembered everything they said.
And I used all that and they told me.
And then they wrote, I pass, I pass.
So I was going for the next level.
But then he said to me, Gwen, we couldn't give it to you because they put likely to be defeated.
And I said, I don't have to tell you.
You know, you did well.
I just smile.
He said, but we couldn't give you it because they put likely to be defeated.
So why do you have likely to be defeated?
I said, they always give you likely to be defeated.
They always give me likely to be defeated.
He said, well, if they feel you're not good enough, you know, to go on.
He said, what does it take to get you up to that level?
They should have brought you up to that level.
They thought, you know, and then they would try.
So then, you know what happened next, the union men on my side.
And I knew some of the union men, they were so good, you know, helped me.
And they sort of took it up with them.
But, you know, later on, one thing you know, in hindsight, you know, you could have done push it further, but I didn't.
You know.
And then he said, had we given it to you, there was a question why we gave it to you who had likely to be fitted.
And those, there was someone done just as well as you who had fitted.
So they caused a lot of problems, you know.
But anyway, when I went back, they called me to the office to say, Gwen, they've got an excellent write-up on you,
how well you did at the interview and how you'd pass.
But they couldn't give it to you because they, because I only had likely to be fitted, you know.
All that was there, you know.
And all that experience was terrible.
You were there for 20 something years.
For over 25 years, yes.
And never got promoted?
No.
That is disgusting.
It is, but God is good though because when that lady said to you that blonde woman and they got the job,
they only needed, I think it was on their vacancy, permanent vacancy for when.
And they called me, I was one of them from, I think I think about a dozen.
And I was the only one who got the job.
So I got the job anyway, I skipped it, but never no promotion, but never mind, you know.
There we go.
There's lots of things, you know.
So you got your dream job then because you wanted to be a typist as a child.
Yes, I did.
That's amazing.
I was doing, yeah, but you know what?
How I done it, when it wasn't just quite typing, it was like, when it was typing,
it was all holes like braids, holes in the paper and you had to read them, the holes.
I got them here somewhere, I can't find it.
And I think, how on earth did I learn to, how could I read just all holes,
you know, punching holes?
How I, how I couldn't understand, how did I manage to learn all those?
But we were taught how to do it, you know, and I think of all that.
So you left, when you left, I'm going back a bit.
So when you left primary school.
We went up to Bishop and Under, that's high school, at 11.
I was 11 years old and Lord Snow, Princess Marilyn, Lord Snow opened the school at the time.
It was a big thing.
Tell me a bit about 11 plus.
Oh, you had to have your exams at that time, didn't you?
To get into, you know, school like that, you had to pass the 11 plus.
But yeah, I saw a lot of people, a lot of people failed the 11 plus at the time.
But I failed it, but.
Did you want to drink it?
Did you want to have one?
You failed it the first time?
Yeah, but I passed it after.
But it's only through, like I said, studying.
I surprised myself, what I did, I was, because those, in those days,
you have to memorize the things, do you remember?
When you're doing your exams, I used to have the paper all the time,
I was just writing to myself, you know, all the time and studying.
And I memorized, so it proves that I could do it.
So I managed that.
And then you got to Bishop of like that.
Bishop of Landerfie school, yeah.
There was a prefect there as well.
So if you would, how come you were doing so well in school
and then said that you had no qualifications at the end of it?
No, no, I said, I didn't realize that I didn't have,
I thought I didn't have no qualifications, but with that I did, you know.
So when you left Bishop of Landerfie, you did exams okay after that, to leave?
Oh, but at Bishop of Landerfie, it was time to leave school then.
We were fifteen, you left school at fifteen then.
Then they just brought in the change that you could stay till you're sixteen.
But they want to stay till you're sixteen, I wanted to leave.
And most people would have gotten a trade or something at that point.
What would people normally do?
Because fifteen is very young to leave school.
Yeah, that's my father said, oh my friend came and she got me a job.
It's just in the factory, just packing peanuts, that's all.
And I said, oh, she goes, do you want to?
I said, yes.
I told my father and he said, no.
He said, you're too young to go to work.
I said, oh, my friend's working, I want to go with her.
And I remember, I came with my first wage, it was eight pounds.
Eight pounds a month, so I came home and I said to my mother,
because my friend told me she was giving her mother a keep in a boarding lot.
So I said to my mother, here's two pounds for my boarding lodge.
And I told my father, I gave my mother two pounds for my boarding lodge.
Instead, I go to her and ask her to give me the two pounds back
because I'm still paying your keep for everyone.
And I haven't reduced the money, so ask her for your back.
So I said to her father, you've got to give me the money back.
And I said, but I don't really want it because that's your keep anyway.
So let her keep it.
And he said to me, I'll tell you what.
I said to him, I had two pounds for my bus fare.
And he said to me, with that two pounds, you go to the bank and you save two pounds.
Every month I'd do with that two pounds.
So I thought, two pounds for my bus fare, two pounds to save for my clothes,
two pounds to buy clothes, and two pounds for savings, two for six.
And the two pounds was for, I don't know, it was all worked out.
Saving, two pounds for buying clothes, two pounds for my mother, yeah.
I still gave her two pounds, but I didn't know him, you know,
because I thought she was two pounds.
My friends were payers, so I should have to pay as well.
That's amazing.
Did your father have the same philosophy as your grandmother
about saving from what you have?
Yeah, but he wasn't the same.
My mother was a saver.
It was my mother, when they were over here, she was either to save
so they can buy a house, so they bought a house, looking, they bought it, you know.
He went for my mother because she was a saver.
My father wasn't a saver.
Is there anything, I mean, you were lucky to have your big family,
to have the experience of your grandmother,
to come to the country with your father and your mother there,
and all of your siblings,
was there anything in the house that reminded you of home,
or reminded you of some kids, even though you left when you were so young?
Let's get to what I can remember is that they used to have a gramophone,
and they'd have them playing the records all the time, you know,
and the French room, which,
you heard about the French room, didn't you?
The French room experience, the French room is where,
in the French room, you had all brand new,
you go into that, all brand new fitted carpets,
three piece suites, you know, it was for when the minister comes,
you go in there, and it teaches anyone like that,
but the children went aloud.
They'd keep a lock, lock, specification there.
There was a program on the TV about the French room.
In fact, they'd done a play of it.
So in the French room, you had the gramophone.
Yeah, it was the best room then, if the best, you know, it was lovely.
You had your gramophone, your new gramophone, TV,
everything was all nice, but the children wasn't allowed in that room.
Only guests, you know.
You'd take them in there, you know,
you'd give them a cup of tea on the tray with biscuits or whatever, you know.
You'd treat them nice.
What about the food? Did your mother cook?
Yes, Western Indian food, yeah.
Every Sunday we'd have red beans and rice with the meat.
On a Saturday, it was always soup.
It was like, what's the, I'm trying to think, was it shoulder?
I forgot the name of the meat.
I might have used to buy it on a Friday fish.
Yeah, that is familiar for me as well.
At home, we always, on Saturdays, always soup.
Really?
Yeah.
Where part of Africa are you from?
I'm from Trinidad.
Are you from Trinidad, is it?
The name is African, isn't it?
Yes, my name is African.
Are you a husband, is it?
No.
Is that a surname of?
Adiola is the first name.
Really?
The name my parents gave me, yeah.
I don't know how to say it.
It's from Trinidad.
Yes.
And I spent a lot of my holidays in Syracuse.
So growing up here, was there anything that made you feel different?
You talked about being at work and not being promoted.
What about the experience of school?
A school experience for them.
I can't remember what happened in order to grow up with this school.
She called me and she went into a black beauty.
You know.
That was the way of bringing color into it to really work there.
Apart from that, doing nothing.
We were friends after anyway, obviously.
I don't find racism in Canada, if I found it in Newport.
When did you come to Newport?
How old were you?
When I got married.
So, seventeen.
Seventeen.
What was that?
So how different was the experience?
I found the people very, very different.
In what way?
Like my friend.
When she went to church, they'd move her to her seat.
You know.
We're called, in Canada.
The reason why the Westinians had their own church, because they weren't welcoming the churches anyway.
In this country.
There's a film on telly, it was called.
I don't know if you saw it, another film.
A series.
Where the chap said to the girl.
You know, she was black, he called her.
He called her.
Exotic.
He said, anyway, this is in the church, preaching to them all.
He said, I see we have here an exotic, you know, people in our midst.
And he said, but it doesn't matter.
God will allow you in as well.
That was the mentality.
Because, oh, they do not see you as equal.
They don't even see you as a human being.
They don't see you equal to them.
On a Newport, they're like that.
Did you have any personal experiences of feeling like that?
In Newport, when you just came?
Oh, yes.
Yes.
Very much so.
I can remember.
When I was at my.
My fiance's house, the other time he was marrying.
One of his mother's friends came in and she said to me.
I wouldn't mind having one of you.
I'd give one of you a room in my house.
I didn't know what she meant by then.
Because in Newport, I said to you, her race is the way they have people.
What did she mean?
Was she talking about to help her cook and clean?
No, no, no.
To give me a rent.
To rent me a room.
And then when I said that to Tony, he knew what she meant.
And he said to me, I can remember when he was little.
That's one of his mother's friends said to him.
I have one like you.
And then mixed race child, she was saying.
He was mixed race, but in school they called him Coco.
That was his name.
Because they thought he was really black, you know.
They used to think half castes, the blackest you can get them.
Didn't see, you know, really darker skin.
And then he was like, see my granddaughter down there.
Can you see her there with me?
You know, it was like that, but they called him white love.
What I think, knowing what I know now.
That when they're born, they're like white in there.
Because she told her that it was a hot day and she forgot about it in the sun.
Because I've heard them describe mixed race child as black as night, you know.
Do you think that that mentality is still like that today?
Or things have changed?
No, the end occurrence is still there now to this day.
They think they're more superior.
They don't think that.
And especially when they're showing all this program all the time.
With them, they show you Africa with the children, with the war and all that.
Always showing all that.
I had to say to them, they keep showing that all the time.
But who's putting all these images and who's profiting from it?
And they keep saying, oh, in Africa, it's very corrupt.
That's what they all say.
And you put, they're so corrupt.
You know, you can't trust them any in the back hand.
And they've given them money, they spend it.
I said, but then, because I went to Africa and I said to them and I came back.
You're lucky if 10% leave this country to go to Africa.
Because it's charity, it's more business.
It's a big business.
And it pays the wages.
That's what it's all about.
It's terrible.
You know, a friend of mine, she came here and she was white.
And she couldn't believe she went to Swansea.
And she saw all these chains around the neck and the arms like that.
She couldn't believe it.
It was in the museum showing you what it was like in slavery day.
She couldn't believe.
She found out afterwards that that's how they treated human beings.
I said, that's because the Bible says the heart of man is deceitfully wicked.